# Human-Settlement-Dataset-Assessment

1. This repo holds Jupyter notebooks offering a workflow to comapre human settlement datasets for a given study site. These were developed for my MSc in GIS dissertation. For this project I developed a comparison framework to asses the reative capabilities of human settlement datasets in the Global South.

2. The key research questions (RQ) investigated in my dissertation were:
   1. RQ 1: To what extent do high spatial detail human settlement datasets vary in a Global South setting?
   2. RQ 2: How do the datasets vary for different settlement landscape character?
   3. RQ 3: What factors may contribute to inter-map disagreement for these datasets?

3. Avaiable Jupyter notebooks to answer these research questions include:
   1. Dataset pre-processing (transforms, clips, and reclassifies human settlement datasets).
   2. RQ 1: Non-site-specific variation between datasets (visual analysis of map and total classified area).
   3. RQ 1: Site-specific variation between datasets (inter-map agreement presented by error matrix).
   4. RQ 2: Site-specific variation by settlement size (inter-map agreement by contiguous pixels)

4. The datasets I compared in my dissertation were:
   1. Datasets under test: Global Urban Footprint (GUF), Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL), and High Resolution Settlement Layer (HRSL).
   2. Datasets included for comparison: OpenStreetMap VGI data (OSM VGI), GlobeLand30 (GL30), and MODIS 500m Map of Global Human Extent (MOD500).

5. My dissertation abstract is copied below and full dissertation [included in the repo as a PDF.](../AB_human_settlement_dataset_assessment_dissertation_2017.pdf)

   The spatial detail of automated human settlement mapping is advancing. New datasets utilise developments in computing power, high resolution satellite imagery, and novel detection approaches to classify settlements. These advancements create opportunities to apply the datasets to humanitarian settlement mapping.

   In response to humanitarian crises agencies require geospatial data to assist with response decision making. Many vulnerable countries lack geospatial data and so data is collected through Volunteered Geographic Information campaigns (the Missing Maps Project). This manual digitisation workflow is time consuming and could be enhanced by integrating new automated human settlement datasets. However, studies on the capabilities of these products in a humanitarian mapping context are limited.

   We introduce a comparison framework to assess the relative capabilities of datasets for a site previously mapped by volunteers (Leyte and Samar, Philippines). The framework incorporates techniques to quantify inter-map agreement in total, by settlement character, and by settlement pattern. Inter-map differences are assessed to understand their source and potential causes. The framework is applied to three high spatial detail datasets, the Global Human Settlement Layer, Global Urban Footprint, and High Resolution Settlement Layer.

   We find disagreement between human settlement datasets, particularly in areas with fragmented rural settlements due to increased detection complexity. The Global Human Settlement Layer is identified as unsuitable for humanitarian mapping due to weak classification capabilities for rural settlements. Global Urban Footprint and High Resolution Settlement Layer show satisfactory capability in these settings with a higher proportion of classifications for smaller settlement sizes, and errors of commission indicating capability to detect dispersed rural settlements missed by comparison datasets.

   Overall, we find that no one product offers complete settlement mapping capabilities. Future efforts should focus on incorporating current products for the prioritisation of volunteer mapping, and on fine tuning classifiers with training data generated by volunteer observations.

6. I welcome any feedback and improvements to this work.
